Set up Postgres Database (#37)
UMassCDS/ds4cg2024-inaturalist: README.md

## :hatched_chick: Installation for local development
1. Clone the repository `git clone git@github.com:UMassCDS/ds4cg2024-inaturalist.git`

2. Create .env and .docker.env at the project root. Copy the contents that were given to you on **slack** into these files.

3. Navigate to cloned project's root, run `git submodule init` and then `git submodule update --remote --merge`

4. You are all set for setting up the code.

> Note: We need .env for local development, and .docker.env for docker containers. The difference between them is database url, which is caused by how docker manages networks.

Reviewer: consolidate all the notes into one big Note. or just "additional information" and have them be bullet points with bolding for the main point of each thing.

Reviewer: @oz03-hub  can you consolidate these notes into one with just bullet point.

## :hatched_chick: Installation for local development
1. Clone the repository `git clone git@github.com:UMassCDS/ds4cg2024-inaturalist.git`

> 2. You are given .env.copy and .docker.env.copy, rename these files to .env and .docker.env respectively. Set the following environment variables in each of these files for your desired database configuration: 
>     - `POSTGRES_DB`: Name of your database
>     - `POSTGRES_USER`: Username the server will use to connect to the database
>     - `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`: Password the server will use to connect to the database
>     - `DATABASE_URL`: SQLAlchemy database connection URL. This should be something like `postgresql://${POSTGRES_USER}:${POSTGRES_PASSWORD}@db:PORT_NUMBER/${POSTGRES_DB}`, but refer to the [SQLAlchemy Database Engine docs](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/core/engines.html#database-urls) for more details.

Reviewer 2: Added a note about the option to use SQLite as well: 
```suggestion
2. For local development and testing, you can choose a database engine from two options, PostgreSQL or SQLite. The most important thing is to ensure the `DATABASE_URL` is configured appropriately for your database according to [SQLAlchemy Database Engine docs](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/core/engines.html#database-urls). To aid in setting up the database we've provided example environment files, .env.copy and .docker.env.copy, where the environment variables are listed. You can copy them to .env or .docker.env and fill in the values. 

    a. _PostgreSQL_: Run Postgres in a [local Postgres server](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/server-start.html) or Docker container (see provided docker-compose.yml). You should configure the following  environment variables in your environment file (.env or .docker.env).
    - `POSTGRES_DB`: Name of your database
    - `POSTGRES_USER`: Username the server will use to connect to the database
    - `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`: Password the server will use to connect to the database
    - `DATABASE_URL`: SQLAlchemy database connection URL. This should be something like `postgresql://${POSTGRES_USER}:${POSTGRES_PASSWORD}@db:PORT_NUMBER/${POSTGRES_DB}`, but 
    
    b. _SQLite_: Storing the databases in a simple SQLite database file is useful for development and testing, but shouldn't be used in production. You only need to configure the `DATABASE_URL=sqlite://<path to desired database file>`
```

## :hatched_chick: Installation for local development
1. Clone the repository `git clone git@github.com:UMassCDS/ds4cg2024-inaturalist.git`

> 2. Create .env and .docker.env at the project root. Copy the contents that were given to you on **slack** into these files.

Author: Good idea, there will be .env.copy that they can rename and copy contents in

Note: If you need to switch to a particular `UMassCDS/inaturalist-sinr` branch and run the prototype, navigate to `src/backend/sinr`, use `git checkout <branch-name>` to switch to a branch. Now the submodule will be at a different branch.

## Working with database

> 1. Notice that there are two .env files, .docker.env and .env, .env is used for your local development, .docker.env will be used in your containers.

Reviewer 3: This can be less redundant. Maybe "Notice that there are two .env files -- used for your local development-- and .docker.env -- used for your containers/"

This shouldn't be listed as 1., since you don't really need to take action. Also might be good to explain why the containers AND local are needed at the same time.

> 2. To run the application without containers, first run the database container by `docker compose up db` (you may have to rebuild it if you changed docker-compose.yml). Run `uvicorn src.backend.app.main:app --reload --env-file .env` at project root to run the server, then `npm start` in `src/frontend`.

Reviewer 3: There is a docker section in the readme, this section should go first or maybe be referenced here. Users might be blindsided when looking at the docker command

Reviewer 3: Docker compose up db should be one step. 
Open a different terminal, run uvicorn should be another step. 
Open a third terminal, run npm start should be another step.

Reviewer 3: To run uvicorn and npm, we first need to set up the Conda environment and run npm I, why are these steps after? they should be higher up!

# :penguin: Running the iNatAtor Application

## Run **database** in first terminal:
1. Navigate to project root
2. Launch **postgres container**:
```bash
docker compose up --build db
```

## Run **backend** in second terminal:

> 1. Navigate to the main `ds4cg2024-inaturalist` directory if you are not already there:

Reviewer 3: Conda environment needs to be activated here, add to instructions.

2. Launch the **backend**:
```bash

>  uvicorn src.backend.app.main:app --reload --env-file .env

Reviewer 3: To run uvicorn and npm, we first need to set up the Conda environment and run npm I, why are these steps after? they should be higher up!

>  uvicorn src.backend.app.main:app --reload --env-file .env

Reviewer: note if you run into errors, try:
- pip installing requriements.txt (with ur command)
- installing postgresql (i used homebrew: brew install postgresql)

Author: psycopg2-binary might be a solution

Author: but I will add brew i postgres as a troubleshooting alternative

# Running applications with Docker
1. Install Docker if you haven't already
2. Open Docker Desktop, you cannot run containers or build images, if docker engine is not running
2. Now in terminal, navigate to project root
3. Run `docker compose up --build`, for the first build it may take a while, after build the application will be ran, you can access the application through the `localhost:3000`.
5. You can stop containers with ctrl+c or using the Docker app

Common Docker commands:
- If you want to start the application again, run `docker compose up`
- If you want to just build images, run `docker compose build`
- If you want to build and run containers, run `docker compose up --build`
- If you want to build only one service, run `docker compose build <service-name>`, for example `docker compose build backend`

Note: you don't have to initialize submodule to run docker, dockerfile will set up the submodules for you while building the image.

## Working with database

Sometimes you want to run the application without containers, allowing you to develop things quickly. The **Running the iNatAtor Application** section explains how to run the application locally.

> You can verify connections are working by going to `localhost:8000/health` and `localhost:8000/echo_env`. Note that these paths are included right now to assist with rapid development, will be removed for production.

Author: I still would like to keep /health/ because some people don't know how to communicate with postgres through terminal or don't know how to check if things are running correctly on docker, /health/ is an easy way to make sure thing is up and running. echo_env can be removed

Note: The codebase is getting bigger, therefore add database related code in `src/backend/app/db`, then make proper API routes in main, if it gets too big, we can resort to using API routers from fastapi.

> Note: There are two environment files (.env and .docker.env) because the database url for local development and docker environments are separate.

Author: I think this will introduce a lot of overhead and complication, sqlite might be good for quick development and we used to implement things quickly but we decided that postgres would be what we use in any case. @ginic your thoughts on this?

> Note: There are two environment files (.env and .docker.env) because the database url for local development and docker environments are separate.

Author: Running postgres is not that difficult on docker, and this request is kind of expanding the scope of the ticket

> Note: There are two environment files (.env and .docker.env) because the database url for local development and docker environments are separate.

Reviewer 4: I still don't like the idea of ​​running a postgresql container for local development.
if you just add 2 lines of code to database.py you can:
1. don't start docker at all
2. do not create any .env files locally

Perhaps if we decide to save predictions in the form of coordinates, then sklight will not suit us. but we don't do that yet...

```python
DB_URL = os.getenv("DATABASE_URL")
if not DB_URL:
    DB_URL = "sqlite:///./src/backend/db.sqlite3"
```

> Note: There are two environment files (.env and .docker.env) because the database url for local development and docker environments are separate.

Reviewer 4: yes, it should work. But now we have to not forget to create  `.env`  file to put this link there)

> Note: There are two environment files (.env and .docker.env) because the database url for local development and docker environments are separate.

Reviewer 2: Sounds good! I will add a suggestion so that information is in the README

Note: If you want to build only one service, use `docker compose build <service-name>`, for example for backend it will be `docker compose build backend`.

## Working with database

1. You can run the application without containers, allowing you to develop things quickly. Refer to **Running the iNatAtor Application** above for instructions.

> 2. You can verify connections are working by going to `localhost:8000/health` and `localhost:8000/echo_env`. Note that these paths are included right now to assist with rapid development, will be removed for production.

Reviewer 3: 1 and 2 are not actions, are just notes. I suggest keeping number only on actions.

Author: I will reword those, I think it's still important to verify connection as a step
